Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated
Montgomery County, Maryland Chapter

Constitution & Bylaws













 Edition










Published by
Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated
Montgomery County, Maryland Chapter
Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated

INCORPORATION
Under the laws of Delaware, August 28, 1947, Jack and Jill of America was incorporated and issued a charter as a National Organization.

FOUNDER
Mrs. Marion Stubbs Thomas
(1910-1996)


Montgomery County, Maryland Chapter
Granted permanent status in 1962

ORGANIZER
Mrs. Henrietta B. Franklin

CHARTER MEMBERS
Mrs. Ellen L. Davis
Mrs. Edithe Gordon
Mrs. Catherine Hanks
Mrs. Emily Hill
Mrs. Ella Horad
Mrs. Eleanor Jackson
Mrs. Catherine King
Mrs. Louise Mathieu
Mrs. Novella Monk
Mrs. Evelyn Page
Mrs. Sylvesta Roberts
Mrs. Martha Swanson
Mrs. Alda Taylor
Mrs. Mary Williams
Mrs. Catherine Williams

Contents

Montgomery County, Maryland Chapter
Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated
Chapter Bylaws

Article I	Name										6

Article II	Objectives and aims								6
	Section 1	Objectives									6
	Section 2	Aims										6

Article III	Membership									6
	Section 1	Chapter membership							6
	Section 2	Individual Membership							7
		A.	Member In good Standing							7	
		B.	Associates Group								8
	Section 3	New Members								9
Candidates for Membership						9
Candidate Selection Procedure						9
Orientation									9
Initiation									9
Legacy Status								9
Responsibilities of New Members						10

	Section 4	Transfers									10
	Section 5	Leave of Absence								11
		A. 	Personal Reasons								11
		B.	Participation during Leave						11
	Section 6 	Code of ethics								11

Article IV 	Responsibilities of Member In Good Standing				11

Article V	Chapter Boundary								12

Article VI.	Dues and Finance								12
	Section 1	Financial Policy								12
		A.	Fiscal Year									12
		B.	Transactions and Accounting						12
		C.	Financial Statement							12
		D.	Postmark Date								12
		E. 	Non-Sufficient Funds							12
		F. 	Transaction Fees								12
	Section 2	Chapter Dues								12
		A.	Determination of Dues							12
		B.	Dues Timeline								13
		C.	Nonpayment of Dues							13
		D.	Per Capita Tax								13
	
	Section 3	Chapter Obligations							13
	Section 4	Member Obligations							14
		A.	Dues and Assessments							14
		B.	Purchase of Tickets							14
	Section 5	Fundraising and Charitable Contributions				14
		A.	Fundraising									14
		B.	Distribution of Proceeds							14
	Section 6	Audits										14
		A.	Internal Audit								14
		B.	External Audit								14

Article VII	Elections									15
	Section 1	Nomination of Officers							15
	Section 2	Election Procedures							15
	Section 3	Appointment to Fill Vacancy						15
	Section 4	Eligibility for Elected Officers						16

Article VIII	Officers									16
	Section 1	Elected and Appointed Officers						16
	Section 2	Duties of Officers								16
	Section 3	Responsibility of Outgoing and New Officers				18
	Section 4	Installation of Officers							18
	Section 5	Resignation of Officers							18
	Section 6	Penalties for chapter officers					                18

Article IX	Committees									19
	Section 1	Executive Board Committee						19
	Section 2	Standing Committees							19
	Section 3	Internal Chapter Financial Evaluation Committee			19						

Article X	Termination of Membership						19
	Section 1	Reasons for Termination							19	Section 2	Procedure for Termination						19
	Section 3	Voluntary Termination							20

Article XI	Parliamentary Authority							20

Article XII	Amendment of Bylaws							20

Article XIII	Meetings and Quorums							21
	Section 1	Regular Meetings								21
	Section 2	Quorum									21
	Section 3	Group Meetings								21

Article XIV	Social Activities								21

Article XV	Electronic Mail								21


Montgomery County, Maryland Chapter
Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated
Teen Auxiliary Guidelines 

Article I	Name										21

Article II	Membership								 	21

Article III	Attendance								 	21	

Article IV	Voting								 	22
	
Article V	Code of Ethics								23

Article VI	Officers									23
	Section 1	Elected and Appointed Officers						23
	Section 2	Qualifications								24
	Section 3	Elections									24
	Section 4	Installation									24
	Section 5	Duties										24
Article VII	Dues and Finance								26

Article VIII	Amendment of Bylaws							26
	
Article IX	Parliamentary Procedure							26

Article X	Definitions									27

Appendix I	Chapter Boundary map							28

Appendix II	Policies and Procedures							29	
	Section 1	Governance									29
				Reviewing Bylaws and Policies and Procedures		30
	Section 2	Chapter Operations							32
				Chapter Finances							33
	Section 3	Programming								39
				Hosting children’s monthly activities				40
	Section 4	Membership									43
				Process for review of membership termination appeals	44
	



Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated
Montgomery County, Maryland Chapter


Chapter Bylaws


ARTICLE I. Name

This chapter is designated the Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated Montgomery County, Maryland Chapter (JJMCMC or Chapter).


ARTICLE II. Objectives and Aims

Section 1: Objectives
The objectives of this non-profit organization are:
To create a medium of contact for children which will stimulate growth and development.
To provide for children, constructive educational, cultural, civic, recreational, health and social programs.

Section 2: Aims
The aims of this organization are:
To aid mothers in learning more about their children by careful study.
To seek for all children the same advantages which we desire for our own.
To support all national legislation aimed at bettering the conditions of all children.


ARTICLE III. Membership

Section 1:  Chapter Membership
JJMCMC shall be a constituent and subordinate unit of Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated, subject to the general authority and jurisdiction of the national organization.

For a chapter to be considered in good standing it must:
1. Have the required elected and appointed officers. 
2. Maintain a minimum of fifteen (15) members.
3. Hold a minimum of seven (7) meetings of the entire chapter each program year. These meetings may include but are not limited to chapter business meetings and planning meetings.
4. Host National and Regional conferences, conventions, events, and meetings as assigned. 

A chapter’s level of membership and its activity shall determine its status with the organization.

A chapter’s attendance at conferences, conventions, activity in the community, the ability to carry out the aims and objectives of the organization, the demographics of its location and the chapter’s recruitment efforts shall be documented.

A chapter that fails to maintain its Good Standing status will be subject to a review of its viability and may be dissolved as outlined in these bylaws or the organization’s policies and procedures or other governing documents or subject to disciplinary action as outlined in Article II, Section 8 (Chapter Penalties) of the National Constitution and bylaws. 


Section 2. Individual Membership – The membership shall consist of those members sponsored and elected into membership as prescribed herein.  Sponsored is defined as having a candidate’s potential membership supported by a member in good standing in a manner consistent with Article III, Section 3. A.2.  Elected is defined in Article VII, Section 2.  Membership shall also consist of individuals entering the Chapter under legacy status or any active, financial member transferring from another chapter of Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated. 

	A. 	Member In Good Standing
1. 	Mothers, female legal guardians, or female legal custodial caretakers with children between the ages of years two (2) through nineteen (19) may hold membership in good standing in Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated. 
2. 	To maintain membership, a member must be in good standing.  Good standing as used in this document means that a mother must be active and financial.  Active is defined as participating in JJMCMC activities, participating in a minimum of four (4) Mothers’ Meetings or half of the Mother’s Meetings held by JJMCMC, whichever is greater, sponsoring a minimum of one (1) Grade-Group Activity for each Grade Group in which she has a child, and supporting the Jack and Jill of America Foundation, Incorporated.  
	i. To be considered a ”meeting,” the Chapter must: (1) provide notice of the meeting to the entire membership body; (2) hold the meeting in a space or use a meeting format that makes it feasible for the entire membership body to attend the meeting; (3) have an agenda for the meeting; (4) maintain a record (i.e., minutes or a report) of what occurred at the meeting and/or the actions taken; and (5) maintain a record of the members who attended the meeting.	 
3.	A member in good standing shall be required to attend one (1) national convention OR one (1) regional conference OR one (1) regional area workday or cluster or one (1) teen conference on a rolling four (4) year period for the duration of her membership tenure. If a member's tenure in the organization is less than four (4) years, the member must attend one (1) national convention or one (1) regional conference or one (1) regional area workday or cluster or one (1) teen conference prior to completing her tenure.
4. 	Financial is defined as having paid all chapter, regional and national dues, assessments and fees.  A member who is not financial at any time during a program year shall not be entitled to vote until she resumes the status of being financial.  
5. 	The status of a member in good standing terminates at the end of the membership program year which includes all conventions when the youngest child completes high school (or secures the equivalency thereof) or reaches age twenty (20).
6. 	The JJMCMC membership shall be no fewer than fifteen (15) members and shall have a maximum number of members in good standing set at 140 with the following qualification: legacies and transfers who meet the applicable requirements may join as a member in good standing even if their addition would cause the number of members in good standing to exceed 140 in the year that they are admitted as members. 
7. 	In the case a member in good standing gives birth, adopts, assumes custody, or becomes a legal guardian of a child during her tenure, such child shall be activated in Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated after reaching two (2) years of age or after such time as the member assumes custody or legal guardianship of a child between the ages of two (2) and sixteen (16). Such a child must turn two (2) years old on or before June 1st of the preceding program year to be eligible for activation.  A member may choose to defer the child's activation to a later program year but not beyond the program year in which the child turns three (3) years old.  If the member is of the opinion that the child cannot meaningfully participate in Jack and Jill programming due to social, emotional, mental, physical, and/or medical challenges, the member shall have the option not to activate the child. The member may not activate this child later, and this child will not be eligible to receive legacy status.
8. 	Any child who resides with and is receiving long term continuous care from a mother, female legal guardian or female legal custodial caretaker who is a dues-paying member of this Chapter can participate in this Chapter.  A mother who chooses to deactivate one or more of her children from the organization is not allowed to re-enroll them.
9. 	Upon the death of a member in good standing, the children may continue their affiliation with the organization for the duration of that program year and the ensuing program years, if the parent (guardian) so desires. A deceased member shall be classified as having completed her tenure in good standing thereby granting immediate legacy status to her children irrespective of their age or if they continue to participate in the organization.
10. 	A mother who has completed her tenure in good standing and, due to changed circumstances, desires to again become a member of Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated shall be entitled to automatically become a member of this chapter, if she resides within the Chapter boundaries, upon submission of an application and payment of any required fees, except the “one time” National Headquarters fee shall not be due upon rejoining the organization.

	B. 	Associates Group
1. 	Mothers considered for membership in the Associates Group shall be former members who served their complete tenure in good standing.
2.	A member in good standing completing her tenure may continue within the Associates Group when her youngest child completes high school or when the youngest child reaches age twenty (20). A member of the Associates Group will be required to pay all national and regional per capita taxes. In addition, a member of the Associates group will be assessed a flat fee per program year upon which JJMCMC and the Associates Group will mutually agree.  This fee will be due by August 31st.  Life members are not required to pay regional or national per capita throughout their affiliation as a life member with the organization.
3. 	A member of the Associates Group may attend national and regional meetings as a non-voting member but cannot be elected to an office or chair a national committee other than the Associates’ Group Chair.
Associates Group members may organize at the local level into a group known as the “Associates Group” of Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated with a minimum of five (5) financial Associates Group members.  Financial is defined as having paid all annual chapter associate dues, and national and regional per capita or life membership fees 
The Associates Group shall organize through a local chapter. All funds must be submitted and deposited into the local chapter’s operating and/or fundraising accounts.
The Associates Group must give financial support to the Jack and Jill of America Foundation, Incorporated.  They may support the Foundation by assisting and/or supporting JJMCMC (local chapter) with its fundraiser, by having their own fundraiser, or by making a donation. 
7.	If the chapter or the Associates group that the Associates group member is affiliated with dissolves, the Associate group member is entitled to transfer her membership to a nearby chapter or to the national office.
8.	An Associate member may choose to affiliate with the Associates Group of a nearby chapter, if her chapter does not have an Associates group.
9.	JJMCMC shall have an Associate Liaison to help recruit tenured mothers and disseminate associate information to associates and the Associate group. The associate membership may fall under the responsibilities of the Vice President.
10.	Upon the death of a child of a member in good standing, a member may continue her affiliation with the organization as an Associates’ Group member, if she has no other child between the ages of two (2) and nineteen (19).

Section 3.  New Members
Candidates for Membership.  Candidates for membership come through JJMCMC’s in-take process and legacy status.
Candidate Vacancies. Candidate vacancies for new member sponsorships (excluding legacies and transfers) exist when the membership of JJMCMC is fewer than the maximum limit of 140. 
Candidate Sponsorship.  The following are the requirements for sponsoring a candidate for membership: 
Each member, who has completed a minimum of two (2) full years in good standing in this Chapter and who is financial on all assessments and fees.  Notwithstanding any other provision in the bylaws, such member must have met the minimum financial obligation for all chapter assessments and fees by February 1st of the current program year in order for the candidate for membership to be presented to the membership. 
If the member's candidate receives membership, that member can then only submit another candidate after two (2) full chapter program years have been completed, unless this requirement for sponsoring a new member for the upcoming calendar has been suspended by a majority vote of the membership.
Each member in good standing who sponsors a candidate who receives membership shall serve as a mentor to this candidate for at least one (1) full program year.  If a member will not be available to serve as a mentor during the next program year, the member must have a co-sponsor who will be available to serve as a mentor for the next full program year before sponsoring the candidate.  
Candidate Selection Procedure. 
Availability of vacant slots will be presented to the members by the Membership Chairperson no later than the October meeting.
Each submission for new membership will be accompanied by a written National Sponsorship Nomination Form, including a candidate profile, to acquaint the chapter membership with the candidate and her family.  The submissionto the JJMCMC  received  later than January 31.  Such profiles will be reviewed for compliance with requirements by the Membership Committee, which will prepare and present to all members profiles of all qualified prospective new member candidates.  
Selection of new chapter members may only be held once a program year during the months of February through April. 
The Membership Committee will create the secret ballots prior to the Chapter meeting during which the vote is held. These ballots will show only the prospective new member’s name and sponsor(s). The ballots will be distributed during a Chapter meeting held no later than April. Tellers appointed by the Chapter President or designee collect and tally the ballots. A two-thirds (2/3s) vote of the members present is required to secure an invitation for membership. The results of the vote are announced at the same meeting as the vote is held. Prospective new members only have one opportunity to secure an invitation for membership per intake cycle. Multiple rounds of balloting to receive the required two-thirds vote are not permitted.
	C. Orientation.  New members orientation shall be held before the initiation ceremony. 
	D. Initiation.  The initiation ceremony shall be no later than May 31st.  The roster of new members, their joining fees and the Headquarters assessment must be sent to the National Headquarters no later than May 31st. Additionally, new members must be added to the Membership Information System no later than May 31st. Any chapter that is delinquent in complying with either of these tasks by May 31st will be subject to a fine pursuant to the National Financial Handbook.  
	E. Legacy Status. Legacy status is granted to each child (male or female) who graduates from a Jack and Jill chapter and whose mother was a member in good standing at the time of the child’s graduation (or granted immediate legacy status due to the death of their mother who completed and shall automatically become a member of this chapter upon submission of an application and payment of any required monies under the following conditions:
1. 	Each legacy (male or female) shall attain membership through this process only once.  If legacy status was granted to the first female spouse of a male child, any subsequent spouse must seek membership as a new member.
2.  	Legacy applicants are oriented and initiated on the same timetable as other incoming members. 
3. 	Legacy applicants shall be, in addition to chapter quota, initiated yearly. 
4.    Legacy members are expected to fulfill the requirements of membership established by JJMCMC and the national organization. 
5.    Legacy members who do not fulfill the obligations of membership are subject to the same process of termination as outlined in these bylaws. 
6.    Members who are terminated may not re-apply for membership under legacy status.
	F. Responsibilities of New Members.  
Mothers who are extended a written invitation to join JJMCMC must respond within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the invitation. A new member is required to pay a new member fee, that includes dues, fees, and assessments. Any new member who does not pay the membership dues prior to initiation will forfeit initiation and membership in the new chapter.  
New members shall be required to attend orientation and initiation.  
New members shall be charged with all responsibilities set forth in these bylaws for all members in good standing.

Section 4. Transfers
A member in good standing who changes her place of residence outside her current chapter’s boundaries shall within a period of one (1) year of the change, transfer to an existing chapter in the new city or the national office in the absence of a chapter in the new city, irrespective of the chapter membership quotas.
If a member moves to an area where there is no chapter but there is a chapter nearby, said member shall have the ability to transfer to a nearby chapter if she can meet all membership requirements. If the transferring member joins a nearby chapter, the transferring member may not transfer her membership to another chapter that shares boundaries with the chapter she joined. 
When a member in good standing moves to an area where there is no chapter, the former chapter shall transfer the membership to the national office upon request. 
Any member in good standing transferred to within JJMCMC boundaries may affiliate with this Chapter within one (1) year of the change and will be admitted automatically as a member in good standing when the transfer request submitted and effectuated by the member on the required transfer form is approved and forwarded by the National Headquarters office. A transferred member will be accepted irrespective of the established JJMCMC quota.
A member who changes her place of residence within this region but has been a member in good standing in this chapter for a period of three years or more may choose to remain a member of JJMCMC and is not required to transfer to an existing chapter in the new city, if she's able to maintain the obligations of membership as established by JJMCMC.
A member in good standing who transfers to JJMCMC shall not be required to pay national, regional, and local chapter dues twice in one fiscal program year.
In situations when a change in a chapter’s boundaries excludes the residence of a mother in good standing, she may, within a period of one (1) year of the change, transfer to an existing chapter whose boundary encompasses her place of residence or the national office in the absence of a chapter in her place of residence, irrespective of the chapter membership quotas. 

Section 5. Leave of Absence
	A. 	Personal Reasons.  A member in good standing may, for personal reasons, request in writing, prior to May 1st  a leave of absence status. A leave of absence status shall be in an increment of one Program Year.  Exceptions for extenuating situations, provided in Section IV (Membership), IV. Leave of Absence, where the May 1st deadline for request cannot be adhered to will be considered by the Executive Board before presenting to the Chapter. All requests will be addressed to the President of the Chapter, which will be presented to the Executive Board for a recommendation. The Chapter shall vote on leave of absence requests that meet the criteria of this section. The member must meet all national and regional financial obligations, including the National bylaws 1:4 conference attendance requirement. A member shall have until June 15th to withdraw her LOA request. If such request is withdrawn, the member must pay remaining Chapter dues pursuant to Article VI, Section 2. Members may be placed on leave of absence status two (2) times during their tenure with the Chapter. 

	B. 	Participation During Leave.  A leave of absence prohibits the participation of the entire family during the leave period unless otherwise authorized by the chapter due to extenuating circumstances as outlined in the national organization’s governing documents.	

SECTION 6. CODE OF ETHICS
	A. All members must sign the Code of Ethics Acknowledgement Form each program year by the date stated in the National Handbook.


ARTICLE IV Responsibilities of Member in good standing

Section 1. A member in good standing will have general supervision over the business affairs of JJMCMC and will exercise the right to vote.
Section 2. Each member in good standing is obligated to:
Attend at least four (4) of seven (7) Mothers’ Meetings or half of the Mother’s Meetings held by JJMCMC, whichever is greater.  The term “meeting” is defined under Article III, Section 2.A.2.ii. of these bylaws. 
Actively serve on at least one committee or as a Grade-Group Chair.
Meet all financial obligations and pay for tickets and other assessments as voted on by JJMCMC, by the due date, as announced by the chapter.
Consistently adhere to rules of conduct established in the Jack and Jill of America National Code of Ethics. The National Code of Ethics and grievance process as outlined in the organization’s policies and procedures manual and as promulgated by the national organization are binding on the members, chapters and regions of the organization.
Consistently adhere to operating in accordance with the current governing documents of the organization including but not limited to the JJMCMC bylaws, the National Constitution and bylaws and Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised.  

ARTICLE V Chapter Boundary

The territorial boundary for the Chapter shall be residence in Montgomery County, Maryland, east of Maryland State Route 355 as graphically represented in the boundary map incorporated into this document as Appendix 1.

ARTICLE VI – Dues and Finance

Section 1.  Financial Policy
Fiscal Year.  The fiscal year for the organization runs from June 1st through May 31st.
Transactions and Accounting.  JJMCMC shall manage its financial transactions in accordance with generally accepted accounting rules and practices and keep appropriate records.
Financial Statement.  JJMCMC is responsible for submitting a financial statement for the period of June 1st through May 31st, on a form provided by the National Treasurer not later than June 30th of each year. This statement must be prepared and signed by the designated officers of the period June 1st through May 31st.
Postmark Date: The postmark date shall be used as the date of submission for payments as opposed to the date of receipt.
Non-sufficient Funds (NSF): Payment returned by the originating financial institution will be assessed an NSF fee of $25, or the amount charged by the Chapter’s financial institution if greater. 
Transaction Fees: Convenience fees applied by merchants for payment made via credit card, PayPal, ACH transfers, etc. must be paid by the mother at the time of purchase.

Section 2.  Chapter Dues - The Chapter shall be financed by dues from its members and other contributions as provided in the bylaws.
	A.	Determination of Dues.  Dues for member in good standing and associate group members will be proposed by the JJMCMC Budget Committee. The proposed budget for the next program year will be distributed to the membership no later than  week in advance of the April Mothers’ Meeting and presented for discussion and approval during the  and/or Mothers’ meeting(s). 
	B.	Dues Timeline.   All financial obligations of a member for the current program year must be satisfied prior to acceptance and crediting of the upcoming program year’s dues.
C.	Nonpayment of Dues. A mother in good standing who has not paid her dues in full by June of the current year will be assessed a late fee of $50.00. After July 15th an additional penalty of $100.00 will be assessed, due immediately.  All ues-related payments and penalties must be made by personal check, cashier’s check, money order or other chapter-approved e-payment system. A member who fails to pay her dues by July 31st, will be notified by the Vice President that the member will not be included in the Chapter Roster sent to the National Organization on August 1st, and that membership termination proceedings may be initiated by the National Organization. 

Section 3.  Chapter Obligations

Chapter Representation for Conferences and Conventions
1. Each chapter is required to send a delegate to National Convention and Regional Conferences.
2. The Chapter President shall serve as the chapter’s delegate and representative for all Regional and National events. The Chapter Vice President shall serve as the chapter’s alternate for all Regional and National events. In the event the Chapter President and/or the Chapter Vice President is not able to attend a Regional or National event, the Chapter shall send the next highest-ranking officer(s) available to attend as the substitute(s).
3. Each chapter is required to send a teen delegate and a Chaperone to Teen Conference.
4. Each chapter is required to participate in Area Workday meetings as outlined in their Regional Policy and Procedures. At least two (2) representatives, one being the Treasurer, from each Chapter should attend annually. 
5. The cost of attendance should be provided for pursuant to the National Financial Handbook.

Chapter fees and payments
JJMCMC is responsible for paying all national and regional assessments for financial members as outlined in the bylaws of those groups within the prescribed time period.
JJMCMC will be responsible for paying national joining fees for new members no later than May 31st. 
The Chapter is also responsible for all fees, registration, hotel, and transportation for the President (Delegate) and Vice President (Alternate) who will represent the Chapter at the National Convention and  the Regional conferences.  
Hotel accommodations and transportation costs for designated delegates will be reimbursed at the most economical rate possible. 
Transportation costs for designated delegates will be reimbursed at the most economical airfare rate available, or if traveling to the destination in a personal car, mileage will be reimbursed at the current IRS standard mileage reimbursement rate. The maximum reimbursement for the use of personally owned motor vehicles shall be that amount that would have been incurred if traveled by air. 
Receipts are required for all funds to be reimbursed. Any receipts submitted that are deemed excessive by the Executive Board will be subject to exclusion from reimbursement.


Section 4.  Member Obligations
Dues and Assessments.  Chapters may vote to levy assessments against its members; such assessments become part of the member’s financial obligation to the organization. Members are responsible for all assessments voted on by JJMCMC and/or required by National/Regional payable by the prescribed date. JJMCMC fundraising assessments shall be approved by ballot vote of the body at a mothers’ meeting with not less than fourteen (14) days’ notice prior to the vote and notification issued in separate written correspondence. Complete detailed line item supporting the proposed budget and report of the fundraising plan shall be provided to the membership not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the vote.
Purchase of Tickets.   A member who submits an RSVP for an event is responsible for the associated costs, including tickets (if applicable), if she does not attend and the RSVP deadline has passed. See Section II, Chapter Operations, Member Financial Obligations, G.V. 
 
Section 5. Fundraising and Charitable Contributions
A.	Fundraising.  At least one (1) fund-raising activity will be held each year.  In the planning, execution and reporting of fundraisers, JJMCMC should adhere to the Jack and Jill Foundation’s Fundraising Code and Guidelines for prudent practice.  
	B.	Distribution of Proceeds.  A minimum of one-third (1/3) of the proceeds raised in the name of Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated by JJMCMC shall be designated for the Jack and Jill of America Foundation, Incorporated. A ten percent (10%) Fundraising Administrative Allocation may be retained by JJMCMC in the fundraising bank account to fund future fundraisers. The remaining portion may be kept for support of local charities, as approved by the Internal Revenue Service, including a lump sum to an IRS approved charity in the name of Chapter Organizer Henrietta Franklin. All contributions should be received by the National Treasurer by June 1st. 

Section 6. Audits
A.	Internal Financial Review.  An internal financial review of all financial books will be conducted annually by August 31st by the Internal Chapter Financial Evaluation Committee.
B.  External Audit.  An external audit or review by a Certified Public Accountant of all chapter financial books is recommended at the end of a Chapter Treasurer’s term and by July 15th and/or if the Chapter’s national and regional per capita and assessments exceed $25,000.00 as voted on by the Chapter.

ARTICLE VII - Elections

Section 1. Nomination of Officers


Section 2. Election Procedures    
Section 3.  Appointment to Fill Vacancy  
For the permanent vacancy of an officer position, except that of President, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment from the President and upon the approval of the Executive Board. In case of a permanent vacancy in the office of President, the Vice President shall assume the office of President. Vacancies shall be filled within thirty (30) calendar days of the vacancy.

Section 4. Eligibility for Elected Officers
Each candidate for office will have been a JJMCMC member in good standing for a minimum of two (2) full years immediately preceding the nomination.  All officers shall be in good standing, pursuant to Article IV, Responsibilities of Member in Good Standing, and in compliance financially with their local chapter, the region, and the national organization for the complete tenure of office.
Each elected officer is expected to maintain good standing during the complete tenure of office.
A member may serve on the Executive Board without limit as an elected or appointed officer including the President, Vice President, Program Chair, Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretary, Financial Secretary, Editor, Parliamentarian, Historian, Foundation Chair, Sergeant-at-Arms, Chaplain and Associates Chair.


 ARTICLE VIII - Officers

Section 1. Elected and Appointed Officers
Elected Officers.  Elected Chapter officers must include, but are not necessarily limited to the following offices: President, Vice President, Program Director, Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretary,Financial Secretary and Editor.  Officers assume responsibilities of their office once the new program year starts on June 1st following their installation. 
Appointed Officers.  Appointed officers must include, but are not limited to, Foundation Chair, Parliamentarian, Protocol Chair, and We Are One Chair (aka Champion Mom).  Other appointed officers may include Historian, Sergeant-at-Arms, and any others appointed by the President during her term of office or such other officers as recommended by the Chapter’s Executive Board. All Appointed Officers must remain in good standing for their complete tenure in office. 
Eligibility Requirement(s). An Officer appointee must be a member in good standing.
National Office Notification.  The names of the elected officers must be sent to the National Office no later than June 15th of each year.
Teen Officers.  Teen officers should have the same election and installation deadline dates as the mothers.

Section 2. Duties of Officers 
Elected Officers – Elected officers must attend and participate in a majority of at least four (4) of seven (7) executive board meetings that are generally held the week prior to Chapter body meetings.
President. The President will preside at all meetings, enforce the bylaws of JJMCMC, perform all other duties usual to her office, and serve as chairperson of the Executive Board Committee. The President will serve as the delegate to the National Convention, Regional Conference and Mothers’ workday/cluster meetings.   

Program Director. The Program Director will plan activities that are of interest to the members of the chapter in furthering the general purpose of the organization, work with Grade Group Chairpersons to plan and execute multifaceted chapter programming that provides constructive cultural, social, educational or community serving experiences for children, and implement the program thrust of the organization.  Chapter Program Directors are required to submit a chapter program handbook to the National Program Director and Regional Director annually by November 1st.  The Program Director may serve as a delegate to the to the National Convention, Regional Conference and Mothers’ Workday/Cluster meetings, if the President, Vice President, and Treasurer are unable to attend.
Recording Secretary. The Recording Secretary will keep an accurate record of all meetings of JJMCMC and the Executive Board and prepare minutes of all meetings for distribution at the following meeting. At the end of each Program Year, non-manipulable electronic or bound paper copies will be saved for archiving purposes.
Corresponding Secretary. The Corresponding Secretary will receive and record all incoming correspondence for the Chapter and disburse all mail as appropriate. She will prepare all correspondence for JJMCMC except that involving financial matters which will be prepared by the Financial Secretary. At meetings, she will record the members present, and she will work closely with the Membership Chair and the Financial Secretary to maintain the active chapter membership directory and the Management Information System (MIS) (i.e., Digital Cheetah). In the event of an absence of the Recording Secretary, the Corresponding Secretary will keep a record of JJMCMC meetings and prepare minutes for distribution.
Financial Secretary. The Financial Secretary will receive all monies for JJMCMC; maintain a record of collections in a numbered receipt book; provide receipts to members for all payments received; submit detailed records to the Treasurer of all collections received, including names, dates and amounts of collections; and promptly turn over amounts received to the Treasurer. The Financial Secretary will also prepare all correspondence involving financial matters of JJMCMC and work closely with the Treasurer to ensure the financial viability of JJMCMC.
Editor. The Editor will be responsible for submitting at least three (3) articles annually to "UP THE HILL" for publication on chapter activities. She will also submit newsworthy information/pictures of Jack and Jill activities to local media. A summary record will be kept of correspondence to the National Editor.

Appointed Officers
Parliamentarian. The Parliamentarian will advise the President on orderly conduct in meetings, interpret procedure according to the organization’s governing documents and Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised, and perform other duties as assigned.
Historian. The Historian will keep an up-to-date journal (scrapbook) of chapter groups, member achievements, memoriam and other relevant materials. Appropriate group photographs will be kept reflecting growth changes of the children. The Historian will solicit information from each Grade Group Chairperson and will work cooperatively with the Editor.
Sergeant-at-Arms.  The Sergeant-at-Arms shall ensure orderly conduct of meetings and supervise the door, not allowing any member to leave or enter the room when business is being conducted and while a vote is in session.
We Are One. We Are One is dedicated to elevating and guiding chapters in developing inclusive programming that benefits all children. The efforts of We Are One have and will continue to bring awareness, academically, socially and emotionally to promote integrated inclusivity and practices, which offer children, tweens, and teens the opportunity to interact and develop skills necessary to navigate social relationships and make life-long friends. We Are One provides each Chapter with tools and resources to “Champion” the programming accommodations for their children, tween, teens, and mothers, thereby promoting better Member Retention.

Section 3. Responsibility of Outgoing and New Officers 
All outgoing officers must: (1) fulfill their duties; (2) complete all reports due at the end of their tenure; (3) transfer all accounts, records, reports and files; (4) turn over all files, records and equipment to incoming officers; and (5) hold at least one (1) transition meeting by June 15th.  The Recording Secretary, Financial Secretary and Treasurer may have an additional thirty (30) days.  It shall be the duty of the incoming Executive Board to ensure that all records are transferred within sixty (60) days. 

Section 4. Installation of Officers
Installation of officers of both the mothers and teens shall be held no later than May 31st  by a JJMCMC, Regional or National officer according to the ceremony prescribed in the Manual. Duly installed officers will meet at least twice during the summer to initiate plans for the ensuing year.

Section 5.  Resignation of Officers 
An officer who is unable or unwilling to perform the duties of her office shall submit a written resignation to the President.  In the event the Chapter President resigns, she shall submit her resignation to the next highest-ranking officer.  The officer may resign by submitting a written resignation by mail addressed to the President or next highest-ranking officer at the Chapter’s post office box address.  The resignation becomes effective immediately upon receipt by the President. 

Section 6. penalties for chapter officers 
A. 	A Chapter officer who fails to fulfill the duties of her office shall be removed from office upon the two-thirds (2/3s) vote of all Chapter members in good standing and pursuant to the process as outlined in the National Policies and Procedures.
Outgoing officers must appropriately transition their responsibilities as defined in these bylaws. Failure to do so may lead to probation, suspension or termination of membership as outlined in the national policies and procedures.  A Chapter officer who refuses to relinquish the records that pertain to that office within the proper time allotted shall be suspended from the organization until compliance is met and may be subject to termination from the organization to be determined by the National Executive Board.  Members on suspension are unable to participate in activities on a local, regional or national level and are subject to a monetary fine determined by the National Advisory Council.
C. 	If a Chapter officer is terminated from the organization by the National Executive Board, a written communication shall be sent to the respective chapter president and the Regional Director so that the terminated member can be removed from the membership roll. Terminated members lose all rights and privileges of membership.

ARTICLE IX – Committees

Section 1. Executive Board Committee
The Executive Board will consist of the elected officers of JJMCMC. The President from the previous administration may be a member of the Executive Board for one (1) year following her term. The President may ask any appointed or designated Chairperson to also serve on the Executive Board. The Committee will meet at such time and place as may be designated by the President, at which six (6) members will constitute a quorum.

Section 2. Standing Committees
A. The standing committees will be: Executive Board, Nominating, Amenities, Budget and Finance, Ways and Means, Internal Chapter Financial Evaluation, Membership Technology, We Are One. The President will appoint the Chairperson of the Amenities, Ways and Means, Technology, and We Are One Committees only. 

B. The chairperson of each standing committee will present work plans to the Executive Board Committee for approval, preferably at the first meeting of the year.  Each committee shall prepare a detailed Committee planning guide, including timetables, resources, activities, and proposed budget for the program year by no later than August 31st and submit to the Executive Board for review and final approval during the September Executive Board meeting.  This guide should be passed on to the incoming Committee Chairperson at the end of the program year.  Each committee Chairperson shall send a budget request to the Executive Board and Budget Committee by February 1st for the ensuing program year. 
C. All appointed Chairpersons of standing and special committees must remain a member in good     standing for their complete tenure in office. 

Section 3. Internal Chapter Financial Evaluation Committee
The Internal Chapter Financial Evaluation Committee shall be comprised of at least three (3) active members elected by the chapter during a chapter meeting. The Chairperson shall be the person receiving the highest number of votes. The Internal Chapter Financial Evaluation will assume the responsibility for auditing all the books of the Treasurer and the Financial Secretary as needed, but not less than annually.  This committee will audit the books before they are turned over to succeeding officers.


ARTICLE X Termination of Membership

Section 1.   Reasons for which membership will be terminated. A member may be terminated if she fails to fulfill any of the stated obligations set forth in the bylaws.

Section 2.  Procedure for termination:
A member who fails to fulfill any one of the stated obligations will be notified in writing that her membership has been terminated. The letter shall state the reasons for the termination and the member's right to appeal.  Copies of the letter shall be sent to the Regional Director, the National Officer of the Eastern region and to the National Recording Secretary via written communication, therein stating the reasons for the termination and the member's right to appeal. 
Upon receipt of notification of termination, a member shall have thirty (30) days to appeal to the JJMCMC Executive Board.  If the appeal at the chapter level is deemed unsatisfactory, a member may then appeal to the Regional Director.  If the appeal at the regional level is deemed unsatisfactory, a member may appeal to the National Advisory Council (NAC).
The JJMCMC Executive Board shall review the appeal and notify the member of its decision by registered mail within thirty (30) days of receipt.  The Regional Director and NAC shall send its decision on any subsequent appeals to the member, the chapter, and its region by registered mail.  The decision of the NAC shall be final.

Section 3.  Voluntary Termination.  A member who wishes to discontinue her membership should submit a written resignation to the Chapter Vice President.  Resignations that have been submitted and accepted may not be rescinded.  A member who has resigned and wishes to re-enter the organization must do so through the intake process.

ARTICLE XI.  Parliamentary Authority

The rules contained in the current edition of Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised shall govern Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the bylaws and any special rules of order which may be adopted.

ARTICLE XII – Bylaws

Section 1. 
A.  These bylaws may be amended provided that: (1) the proposed amendments have been submitted in writing and are circulated to the Chapter members two weeks prior to voting pursuant to the Chapter bylaws and (2) two-thirds (2/3s) of the members present, vote in favor of the amendment.
B. A quorum shall be required for the vote.
	C. Amendments approved at any meeting shall become effective at the close of that meeting unless otherwise stipulated.

Section 2. 
A. In the event that circumstances prevent prior notice, proposed amendments may still be considered at the meeting where a vote on amendments takes place provided that a motion to consider individual amendments is passed by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the members in good standing and present. 
B. A quorum shall be required for this vote.
	C. Amendments approved at any meeting shall become effective at the close of that meeting unless otherwise stipulated.

Section 3. 

ARTICLE XIII – Meetings and Quorums

Section 1.  Regular Meetings
A regular meeting of members in good standing will be held not more frequently than once a month on a date designated by the Executive Board. Special meetings may be called as required for a specific purpose by the President or the Executive Board on one (1) weeks’ notice. 

Section 2.  Quorum
	 A simple majority of the members in good standing of JJMCMC will constitute a quorum. 

Section 3.  Group Meetings
Members, by designated groups, will meet at least once a month. Members in good standing will be assigned to serve as chairperson and co-chairperson of each group and will be responsible to the Vice President.  

ARTICLE XIV – Social Activities

Section 1. Activities for Full Membership 
At least two (2) social activities will be held annually for all members, including active, Associate and honorary members and their spouses.

ARTICLE XV – Electronic Mail

Where Chapter-wide business matters require prior notice (including but not limited to budget approval and bylaws amendments), distribution of all pertinent documents via non-manipulable electronic mail shall satisfy the prior notice requirement.


Montgomery County, Maryland Chapter
Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated
Teen Auxiliary Guidelines 

ARTICLE I. Name

This group is designated the Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated Montgomery County, Maryland Chapter Teen Group (Teen Group).


ARTICLE II. Membership

Section 1:  Membership Eligibility

Membership in this group shall consist of the teens whose mothers; female legal guardians or female legal custodial caretakers are active and financial members of JJMCMC.

A teen must be between thirteen (13) and nineteen (19) years of age and be active.  Active is defined as attending meetings and participating in local chapter teen activities with the local chapter being where his/her mother/legal guardian/custodial caretaker holds membership.

Each teen is encouraged to attend teen conference at least once during their tenure in the Teen Group 

The active status of a teen terminates at the end of the membership program year which includes all conventions when the child completes high school, or reaches age twenty (20) whichever comes first. The active status also terminates when the teen’s mother/female legal guardian/female custodial caretaker withdraws her membership or is terminated from membership with JJMCMC. 

Teens who repeatedly violate regional and or chapter guidelines putting their welfare and that of others at risk may have their membership in the Montgomery County, Maryland Chapter Teen Group terminated upon the recommendation of the Teen Executive Board with the support of the Mothers’ Executive Board.


ARTICLE III. Attendance

Section 1:  Attendance at Business Meetings and Activities

Only members of the Teen Group and Teen Advisors are allowed to attend business meetings, unless the member has received an exception from a Teen Advisor(s) or the Teen President to bring a guest.

Only members of the Teen Group are allowed to attend group activities, unless the Teen Advisor(s) or the teen(s) hosting the activity grants an exception.

It is recommended that teens attend a minimum of two (2) of the monthly teen business meetings, which are held in the months of September, October, November, December, January, February, March, April and May. 

ARTICLE IV. Voting

Voting shall be based on one (1) vote for each member of the Teen Group.                    

ARTICLE V. Code of Ethics

Section 1:  Behavior and Dress

Teens in JJMCMC are expected to behave in ways that reflect respect for our families, our chapter, our region and our national organization.

Appropriate behavior is essential to the successful functioning of our Teen Group.

Everyone in the Teen Group is expected to act in a civil manner at all times. This expectation extends to language, gesture and deed.

No smoking, alcohol, drugs, cigarettes of any kind and no weapons of any type will be allowed at Jack and Jill events.

For Jack and Jill Regional, National and formal Chapter ceremonial events, teens are expected to adhere to dress codes established by Jack and Jill National, Regional and JJMCMC guidelines.  

Additionally, at any and all Chapter, regional and national activities and functions, Teens are required to adhere to the Regional Teen Code of Ethics enacted by the Eastern Region including but not limited to mandatory curfews, room visitation policies, chaperone requirements, and alcohol and drug use policies. 

A minimum mandatory ratio of one (1) adult chaperone for every five (5) teens in attendance throughout the entire Regional Teen Conference inclusive of all social functions shall be required.  A chaperone must be a member (active or associate), or member of Fathers’ Auxiliary of Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated. 

No teen shall drive and/or travel alone to and from the Regional Teen Conference.

Post-curfew parties and room visitation are prohibited at any and all Chapter, regional and national activities and functions.  

ARTICLE VI. Officers

Section 1:  Elected Officers and appointees

A. Elected officers and appointees must be active in JJMCMC for one (1) full year prior to election and appointment.  Officers must remain active participants during their term.  

B. Only one (1) teen from JJMCMC may hold a Regional office. 

C. The term of office shall be for one (1) year, commencing at the time of installation.  

D. The elected officers of the Teen Group shall be: President, Vice President, Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretary, Financial Secretary, Treasurer, Foundation Chair, and such other officers as may be recommended by the Teen Executive Board, the Teen President or the Teen Advisor(s). Each of the officers shall serve the Teen Group under the guidance of the Teen Advisor(s). 

E. The teen appointees of this group may include but not be limited to the Parliamentarian, the Chaplain, the Sergeant-at-Arms, the Historian, and the Editor.  Each shall be appointed by the Teen President with the approval of the Teen Advisor(s).   

Section 2:  Qualifications

All candidates must have attended at least three (3) Teen activities (including at least one (1) community service activity) and three (3) Teen business meetings for the current program year to run for office.

All candidates should be punctual at a majority of the activities attended and should remain to their conclusion.

All candidates must have been active participants in business meetings and other activities.

Section 3:  Elections

The officers shall be elected annually.

A Nominating Committee of the Teen Group will solicit and receive names of Teen Group members being placed in nomination for office. These nominations must be submitted in writing. The Nominating Committee will check the candidate’s eligibility to run for office.

Elections will take place at the March or April Teen business meeting.

Elections will be by closed ballot.

Officers shall be elected by majority vote of a quorum of the members of the Teen Group.  Written notification must be sent fourteen (14) days in advance to all members of the Teen Group informing them of the upcoming election and the candidates seeking office. 

Section 4:  Installation

Teen officers should have the same installation deadline date as Chapter Mothers’ officers. 

Section 5:  Duties

All teen officers of the JJMCMC shall perform their duties under the direction of and with approval from the Teen Advisors.

President
Shall preside over all meetings; serve as ex-officio member of all committees except the Nominating Committee; appoint the Parliamentarian, Chaplain, and Sergeant-at-Arms; and appoint other officers and committees deemed necessary.   Shall work with the Chapter President and Teen Advisor(s) to plan a Teen Calendar.
Shall attend the Regional Teen Conference as the delegate representing the Montgomery County, Maryland Chapter.

Vice President
Shall preside in the absence of the President.
Shall serve as alternate delegate at the Regional Teen Conference meetings. 
Shall act as a liaison between committees.
Shall assist in any way the President deems necessary.

Recording Secretary
Shall keep records of the Teen business meetings and shall bring and keep an attendance book to record the Teen attendance at business meetings.
Shall record all votes and compile all committee reports for inclusion in the minutes.
Shall deliver a report to the Teen Group at each subsequent meeting.
Shall serve in the absence of the Corresponding Secretary.  

Corresponding Secretary
Shall disseminate all correspondence authorized by the Teen Advisor(s) and Teen President to the Teen Group, except that correspondence involving financial matters, which will be prepared by the financial secretary.
Shall serve in the absence of the Recording Secretary.  

 Treasurer 
Shall serve as Chairperson of the Budget Committee and work under the supervision of the Chapter Treasurer.
Shall keep accurate account of all income and expenditures.
Shall submit a monthly report to the Teens of all income and expenditures of the Teen Group.

Financial Secretary
Shall submit a monthly report to the Chapter Treasurer of all monies received by the Teen Group.
Shall record and report all contributions to Jack and Jill Foundation.

Foundation Chair 
Shall encourage and support fundraising efforts and grant submissions by JJMCMC teens. 
Shall disseminate information on the Jack and Jill of America Foundation to the Teen Group.
Shall represent the interests of the Teen Group as they relate to the Foundation.
Shall serve as Chair of the Teen Fundraising Committee and support all fundraising activities.
Shall work with the Teen Financial Secretary and Teen Treasurer along with Teen Advisor(s) and the JJMCMC Foundation Chair to ensure proper reporting and submittal of net proceeds from fundraising as required by the Jack and Jill Foundation, Incorporated. 

Teen Executive Board
The Teen Executive Board shall consist of the elected officers, the appointed officers and the committee chairpersons of the Teen Group. These individuals must perform their duties under the direction of the Teen Advisor(s).

 Vacancies and Removal from Office
Any vacancy in a teen office shall be filled by appointment of the Teen President with the approval of the Teen Executive Board and the Teen Advisor(s).
Removal from office when the elected officer is not performing his/her duty, a new election for that office may be held upon a vote of two-third (2/3)'s of the members of the group voting for removal from office.


ARTICLE VII. Dues and Finance

Section 1:  Dues
Mother members are required to pay the Group VI dues established by the Chapter on behalf of their participating Group VI teens, by June 30th before the program year. 

Section 2:  Finance
The Teen Group must support the Jack and Jill of America Foundation, Incorporated annually.  A minimum of one-third (1/3) of all proceeds raised in the name of Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated by the Teen Group shall be submitted for Jack and Jill of America Foundation, Incorporated. A ten percent (10%) Fundraising Administrative Allocation may be retained by JJMCMC in the fundraising bank account to fund future fundraisers. The remaining portion may be kept to support local charities, as approved by the Internal Revenue Service. All contributions should be received by the National Treasurer by June 1st.



ARTICLE VIII. Amendment of Bylaws

These bylaws may be amended as provided in the JJMCMC Mothers’ bylaws document.   


ARTICLE IX. Parliamentary Procedure

Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised shall be the parliamentary authority of all matters not covered by the Jack and Jill Montgomery County, Maryland Teen bylaws, the Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated National Constitution and bylaws, the JJMCMC bylaws and the Teen Regional bylaws. No clause of these bylaws covering any matter herein shall be in conflict with the JJMCMC bylaws, the Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated National Constitution and bylaws, and the Teen Regional bylaws.  

ARTICLE X. Definitions

Section 1.  An activity is defined as any event that is hosted by one (1) or more Teens during the program year, but does not include Teen business meetings.  

Section 2.  Chapter-wide activities are defined as activities which are hosted by all six (6) groups in the Chapter (including but not limited to the Thanksgiving celebration, Jack and Jill Family Day, Black History Month Activity and the Picnic).  

Section 3.  Fiscal Year is defined as the period between June 1st and May 31st of each year.

Section 4.  Program Year is defined as the period between September 1st and May 31st of the year.

Section 5.  Quorum shall be one-fourth (1/4th) of the active Teen Group.














Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated
Montgomery County, MD Chapter
Boundaries


		














Notes:

Membership in the Chapter depends on the address of the member.

The ZIP codes and cities located east of or intersecting Maryland Route 355 (MD 355) in Montgomery County, Maryland are within the Chapter’s territorial boundary. They are as follows: 

















Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated Montgomery County, MD Chapter

Policies and Procedures Manual



Section I
_____________________
Governance


 
I. PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to prescribe a streamlined process for the Chapters 
review of proposed bylaw amendments and proposed policies and procedures. This 
process will allow the hapter to consider such documents in a timely and efficient 
manner while allowing the membership to utilize its right to make such submissions 
for consideration. 
 
II. DEFINITIONS 
Proposed bylaw Amendment is any provision that purports to change the 
Chapter or National existing bylaws and become a governing law of the Chapter or 
National body if approved. 
 
Proposed Policies and Procedures is any provision that prescribes an 
administrative process for the use of the hapter’s governing Executive Board hapter 
committee chairs, and general membership. If approved, it will become a governing 
document of the chapter. 
 
III. POLICY 
The Chapter bylaws, Policy and Procedures Committee is responsible for the review 
of proposed amendments to the Chapter and National bylaws. The Committee will 
review the proposed amendments for the Chapter bylaws for conflicts with other 
governing documents. The Committee shall review proposed National bylaws 
amendments for recommendation to the membership for Chapter position. 
 
The Chapter bylaws, Policy and Procedures Committee is also responsible for the 
review of proposed chapter policies and procedures and any amendments for any 
conflict with chapter and National bylaws and existing policy and procedures and to 
make a general recommendation to the Executive Board for ratification by the 
general membership. 

IV. GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
 
There exists a clear distinction between what constitutes a bylaw and what constitutes a policy and procedure. See Robert’s Rules of Order. The distinctions must be drawn on each submission for review by the Committee. 
 
 Bylaws should not be amended often. However, when amendments are necessary for the good of the chapter and its entire membership, they are ultimately approved by the Chapter membership. 
 
 Policy and Procedures may be amended or terminated at any time, upon approval by the Chapter members.  They should always be written and approved for the good of the entire Chapter. 
 
V. PROCEDURE 
  
Before or during the October Mothers’ Meeting, the bylaws, Policy and Procedures Committee Chairperson should invite the Chapter members to submit policies and procedures for the Committee’s consideration by November 1st. 
 
. The committee should then convene during November and submit recommendations to the E-Board for review and recommendation to the Chapter membership in December and for ratification by the Chapter Membership during the January Mothers’ Meeting. Two (2) weeks’ 
notice of the proposals shall be submitted to the membership prior to ratification. 
 
. Policies and Procedures are enacted or terminated as recorded in the Chapter Mothers’ Meeting Minutes. 
 
. Before or during the October Mothers’ Meeting, the bylaws, Policy and Procedures Committee Chairperson should notify the body of its right to submit bylaw amendments and to request those amendments be submitted to the bylaws, Policy and Procedures Committee Chairperson by November 1st for chapter consideration. 
 
. The committee should convene during November to consider recommendations on proposed amendments to the Chapter bylaws 

F. Two (2) weeks’ notice of the proposals and positions shall be submitted to the membership 
prior to vote by members in good standing.  The committee should convene during April to consider chapter positions on any National bylaws to submit to the membership during the May Mothers’ Meeting.  Two (2) weeks’ notice of the positions shall be submitted to the membership prior to ratification. 
		








Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated Montgomery County, MD Chapter 

Policies and Procedures Manual




Section II
____________________
Chapter Operations


I. PURPOSE
The purpose of this policy is to provide guidelines for the handling of JJMCMC chapter finances, to encourage personal accountability of all financial obligations by members, and to promote transparency, efficiency and prudence in JJMCMC standards of financial practice.

This policy is designed to complement the Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated bylaws, the Financial Handbook, the Montgomery County Chapter bylaws and all other governing documents of Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated.  The policy shall be reviewed as needed by the JJMCMC Executive Board for modification and amendment.  All modifications and amendments shall be ratified by the body at a subsequent mothers meeting.

II.  INSPECTION OF FINANCIAL RECORDS

III.  REFUNDS

IV.  INCOME AND DEPOSITS

V.  OUTSTANDING DEBTS
Member Financial Obligations - Purchase of Tickets. When a ticket has been reserved or purchased for a member, a member’s child or other guest participant to an event or activity and attendance has been confirmed to the Event Committee or Host Mother prior to the prescribed deadline, and such participant does not attend, the member will be responsible for the cost of the ticket. For children’s monthly activities, JJMCMC will pay the allotment per Article VI, Section 5 for the member’s child, where requested by the Host Mother(s) and this amount will be deducted from the chapter member’s financial responsibility due to such unutilized reserved or purchased ticket(s).


VI.  PRIVACY

VII.  EXPENSES AND DISBURSEMENTS

VIII.  TRAVEL POLICY
Covered expenses for Chapter Officers
IX. RESERVES POLICY




X.  BUDGETS AND PLANNING

XI.  CONTRACTS

XII.  FINANCIAL RECORD RETENTION

XIII.  CONTROLS ON PHYSICAL ASSETS

XIV.  CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICY

XV.  AFFECTED PARTIES
All Chapter Officers and Active Members

 
 

















Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated Montgomery County, MD Chapter 

Policies and Procedures Manual




Section III

Programming



I. PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines for hosting children’s activities. 

II. POLICY 
Each active member must host an activity for each group in which she has a child.  Children’s activities should include a variety of activities that will help them develop rapport and friendship with other children in their group.  Activities should concentrate around the national theme and/or the national programmatic thrust for the year. 

III. PROCEDURE 
Mothers who sign up to host an activity during a month where there is a Chapter-wide activity 
That requires preparation and practice (i.e., Black Family Day-Thanksgiving Dinner, February Black History Month Spelling Bee, Annual Chapter Ski Trip) may receive credit for organizing and hosting the practice.  

C. A Mother in good standing is required to entertain each group in which she has a child, in accordance established schedules. If the activity cannot be held during the scheduled month, the hostess mother will fulfill this obligation in a subsequent month of the current program year. She will notify the Grade-Group Chairperson so that appropriate coordination of the Grade Group’s activities can occur for setting an alternate date.

While it is ideal for each Host Mother to be in attendance at their designated activity, there are – upon the agreement of all hostesses, and the approval of the Grade Group Chair and Program 
Director – several ways that a Mother can participate and receive credit for hosting if she is 
absolutely unable to attend, including: 
Designing and ailing nvitations 
Preparing and delivering refreshments 
Secur a facility, speaker or facilitator 

Where it is appropriate, Host mothers for monthly children’s activities are to treat hosting as they would treat invited guests into their home. 
Electronic invitations and announcements regarding the children’s monthly activites must be sent no later than thirty (30) days prior to the activity.  Invitations should be addressed to the mother for children in Groups 1-5.  For Group 6, the invitation should be addressed to the Jack and Jill teen. Paper invitations may be supplemented but cannot be a standalone substitute.  If the host(s) decides to send paper invitations, the announcements should be mailed no later than thirty (30) days prior to the activity date.  
Host mothers are responsible for providing appropriate refreshments for the children 
throughout the Grade Groups. 
Host mothers should be provided with emergency/health information for children whose legal parents/guardians are not in attendance at the event. 
Host mothers should divide the cost for hosting the children’s activity (other than tickets, 
entrance fees, etc.) among the mothers designated to host for that month. This includes the 
cost of invitations, postage, decorations, and refreshments. 
Host mothers should ensure that mothers are provided with accurate information for 
ticketed activities. If a mother commits to attend (either verbally, via e-mail or Evite response) and fails to do so, she is obligated to pay for the ticket cost advertised, including any costs subsidized by the host mother(s).  A mother who changes her responses before the stated deadline/due date for responses shall not incur any such costs. 
A copy of all flyers, invitations, and pictures must be provided to the Program Director. 
In the event that an activity must be canceled due to the weather, the mothers must reschedule 
the activity. 
If applicable, the Host Mother designated to handle the finances for an activity must keep 

Mothers may not combine their committee work with their hosting requirements, except as 
provided for in the paragraph addressing the hosting of activities to prepare/practice for the 
Black Family Day-Thanksgiving Dinner and February Black History Month Spelling 
Bee. Activity Hosts should be focused on the successful execution of the event on the behalf of the children in the group for which she is hosting an event.  Likewise, it is expected that Committee Chairs and Co-chairs be focused on the successful execution of their event/program.   

IV. AFFECTED PARTIES 
Active Members.

		



Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated Montgomery County MD Chapter 

Policies and Procedures Manual





Section IV
_____________________
Membership





I. PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to outline how the JJMCMC Executive board will review the appeal 
of terminations of membership. 
 
II. POLICY 
The Policies and Procedures Manual is designed to complement The Montgomery County 
Chapter bylaws and other governing documents of Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated.   The Manual shall be reviewed as needed by the JJMCMC Executive Board for modification and amending. All modifications and amendments shall be ratified by the body at subsequent conventions. 
 
III. PROCEDURE 
 
Action can be taken on unsatisfied financial obligations after June 26th.  Letters of 
termination will be dated July 1st, of the current year and sent to the Mothers in question.   
.	An appeal of termination of membership and all supporting documentation must be filed 
in writing in accordance with our governing documents. 
.	The appeal of termination of membership should be addressed to the President (or her 
designee) and the Membership Chair of the Chapter and labeled “CONFIDENTIAL”  
within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving the letter of termination unless this deadline is 
mutually extended.   
.	After review of written appeal letters are completed, an Appeals Committee will need to 
be established to consider each individual appeal.  For the purposes of reviewing the 
received appeal letters, the Executive Board of Elected and Appointed Officers will 
consider these appeals and determine a course of action and resolution. (See J&J Policies 
and Procedures Manual; Section 7, Policy 5.)  
Letters of appeal of termination of membership and any supporting documentation 
will be made anonymous to protect the Mother’s privacy.  The Membership Chair will 

F.	The anonymous version of the letter of appeal of termination of membership and any 
supporting documentation will be distributed for consideration and must be collected 
before we exit due to maintain confidentiality.  All will be asked to honor the request not 
to disclose any information beyond these walls and those participating in this process.

.	The committee will then vote on whether or not to accept the appeal or deny by a simple 
majority vote.  Members with accepted appeals will be offered reinstatement.  Members 
with denied appeals will remain in a terminated status but may appeal the termination to 
the Regional Director and beyond if necessary. 
Chapter incurred administrative costs associated with registered mail notifications will be 
passed to these members should they be successfully reinstated. 

IV. LEAVE OF ABSENCE
 
An extenuating circumstance is defined as a physical impossibility to meet the obligations of
membership due to hospitalization, illness of the member or hospitalization, illness or death of an immediate family member (spouse, children, or parents). A member should provide evidence of said extenuating circumstances such as a letter from the Chapter President
indicating an emergency Chapter-approved leave, a notarized statement confirming illness,
hospitalization, or an obituary as reasonable proof. Financial hardship does not qualify as an extenuating circumstance.

V. AFFECTED PARTIES 
Chapter Membership
Zip Code | City | Zip Code | City
20814 | Bethesda | 20879 | Gaithersburg
20815 | Chevy Chase | 20880 | Gaithersburg
20832 | Olney | 20882 | Gaithersburg (Laytonsville area)
20851 | Rockville | 20883 | Montgomery Village (PO Box)
20852 | Rockville | 20886 | Montgomery Village
20853 | Rockville | 20889 | Bethesda (Walter Reed)
20855 | Derwood | 20895 | Kensington
20860 | Ashton | 20896 | Kensington
20861 | Sandy Spring | 20902 | Silver Spring
20862 | Brinklow | 20903 | Silver Spring
20866 | Burtonsville | 20904 | Silver Spring
20868 | Spencerville | 20905 | Silver Spring
20871 | Clarksburg | 20906 | Silver Spring
20872 | Damascus | 20910 | Silver Spring
20876 | Germantown | 20912 | Takoma Park
20877 | Gaithersburg |  | 
Subject | Effective
Date | Bylaws Reference | Procedure
Number | Approval
Process for Reviewing Bylaw Amendments and proposed policies and procedures | Program Year Sept 1, 2014 | Article XII |  | 5/17/2014
Subject | Effective
Date | Bylaws Reference | Procedure
Number | Approval
Chapter Finances | 10/15/2012 | Article VI |  | 1/9/16 amended
Subject | Effective
Date | Bylaws Reference | Procedure
Number | Approval
Hosting Children’s Monthly Activities | September 11, 2010 | Article IV, Section 2B |  | Amended 5/17/2014
Subject | Effective
Date | Bylaws Reference | Procedure
Number | Approval
Process for EBoard Review of Membership Appeals | July 18, 2012 | Article I, Section 1A |  | EBoard 7/18/2012